---
title: "2025"
publishDate: 2025-01-01
date_start: 2025-10-28
date_end: 2025-10-31
image: "/images/2025/BTC25-Logo.webp"
location: "Chiang Mai, Thailand"
status: "Past Event"
theme: "Ethics in Bible Translation"
proceedings_url: "/categories/2025"
weight: 10
menu:
  main:
    parent: "conferences"

plenaries:
  - name: "Dr. Matthijs de Jong"
    id: "matthis-de-jong" # This matches the folder name in content/authors/
    topic: "The Ghost in the Machine"
  - name: "Dr. Kirk Franklin"
    id: "kirk-franklin"
    topic: "Early Modern Text Analysis"
  - name: "Dr. Hephzibah Israel"
    id: "hephzibah-israel"
    topic: "Early Modern Text Analysis"
  - name: "Dr. Rux Prompalit"
    id: "rux-prompalit"
    topic: "Early Modern Text Analysis"  
  - name: "Dr. Freddy Boswell"
    id: "freddy-boswell"
    topic: "Early Modern Text Analysis"
---


# Ethics in Translation



{{< tabs >}}
{{< tab "Theme" >}}

The theme will be ‘Ethics in Bible Translation’, picking up a topic being explored by the FOBAI Translation Development Group this year. 

We all get involved in Bible translation for different reasons, not least a sense of calling and desire to serve, while doing good and working towards transformation in peoples’  lives. However, this motivation does not exempt us from ethical considerations about our systems, practices, methods and strategies. What ethical lenses do we use to examine how we do what we do? Where does Bible translation intersect with issues like respect, justice, fairness, concern for the vulnerable, minimising harm, and avoiding control and exploitation? 

As you begin to think about, research and prepare for BT 2025, we offer the following sub-themes:

{{< accordion "Ethics of People and Communities" >}}
  This lens focuses on the people involved in Bible Translation, including the language communities themselves, translators, facilitators, advisors, consultants, etc. We each  participate in different ways and each role  deserves ethical examination. Translation also involves wider communities. Best practices and strategies take shape in particular contexts. What are the ethical issues involved with such contextualization?
{{< /accordion >}}

{{< accordion "Ethics of Technology and Processes" >}}
Technology and Bible translation have a long history, from the inventions of writing, early books, the printing press, computers, to machine assisted translation and AI. New technology is emerging faster than ever before. What are the ethical issues we need to consider as we develop and use technology? What about other aspects of the translation process? Strategies for drafting, checking, and distributing also deserve an ethical appraisal.
{{< /accordion >}}

{{< accordion "Ethics of Finances, Leadership and Communication" >}}
  Translation involves cultural mediation where there are often differences of power and differing cultural concepts of goal setting. Funding, decision making, quality assurance, access to resources, and messaging about activities and impact are some of the areas we need to consider. What are the ethical implications of such power relations?
{{< /accordion >}}

{{< accordion "Ethics of Interpretation and Exegesis" >}}
  Bible Translation always involves interpretation, and is shaped by our theological persuasions. What are the ethical frames that guide our practices and the ways we carry out exegesis? 
{{< /accordion >}}

<hr>
The abstract approval process and conference scheduling will be organised around the following six tracks: 

- Technology and Resources 
- Training and Mentoring 
- Theology, Hermeneutics, and Exegesis 
- Methodologies, Media, and Multimodality 
- Church and Community 
- Communication and Context

{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab "Speakers" >}}
{{% list_plenaries %}} 
{{< /tab >}} 

{{< /tabs >}}

<!---
## Conference Proceedings

{{< proceedings 
  title="Paradigms of Bible Translation: 2024 Edinburgh" 
  editor="Sarah Jenkins & Mark Thorne" 
  isbn="978-3-16-148410-0" 
  publisher="BTC Press" 
  link="/downloads/proceedings-2024.pdf" 
>}}
--->