---
title: "Beyond Accuracy: Incarnational Mentoring for Locally Led and Sustainable OBT" 
meta_title: "" 
description: "" 
date: 2025-10-31T11:00:00Z 
categories: ["2025"] 
author: "Misikir Mulugeta, John Ferch" 
tags: ["Church and Community","Methodologies, Media, and Multimodality","Training and Mentoring"] 
draft: false
---

{{< youtube HGDSk942cmk >}}

<p>Ethics in Bible translation goes beyond accuracy and faithfulness to the text; it also has to do with community ownership in its inclusivity and sustainability throughout the translation process. In the Oral Bible Translation model Harvest Mission Ethiopia and Spoken Worldwide implement in partnership, the involvement of and focus on local leadership and mentoring play a crucial role at all levels of the project and its design. <br> <br> This model is called “Incarnational Mentoring.” This oral presentation will describe the five foundational features of the model, and then give specific, practical examples of how it has contributed to locally owned and led Bible translation at HME. Incarnational Mentoring impacts at the very start from the level of the Mother Tongue Translators. This methodology shortens and makes efficient the translation process by removing many obstacles that will not allow for the full potential of the church to be of use. <br> <br> Beyond producing accurate translations, through this process Spoken Worldwide has developed consultants from and with its local partners like HME and other local partnering ministries and churches. <br> <br> These consultants emerge from the community, they engage the community from the beginning in translator recruitment stages, to building up relationships with the community, during translation, quality assurance process and scripture engagement. This allows them to provide more informed guidance, ensuring not only translation quality but also alignment with church and community needs. <br> <br> The Incarnational Mentoring model contributes to ethical Bible translation by making real the one advantage of Oral Bible Translation, empowering the local churches, by equipping them with not only the tools but the trust and partnership, which is investing in long-term sustainability. By investing in local consultants, the process leads a self-sustaining translation movement, teaching communities and learning from them to best serve them. This ethical approach ensures that Bible translation is not just an external intervention but a deeply rooted, locally led effort that strengthens the Church and its mission.</p>

