---
title: "Multi-Modal Methods in Psalms-Study: An Initial Attempt to Include Different Processing Styles" 
meta_title: "" 
description: "" 
date: 2025-10-28T14:35:00Z 
categories: ["2025"] 
author: "June Dickie & Mainor Mora Rodriguez" 
tags: ["Church and Community","Communication and Context","Methodologies, Media, and Multimodality","Neurodiversity"] 
draft: false
---

{{< youtube Vsv2JFWGkd4 >}}

<p>Neuro-diverse persons sense the world differently to those who are neuro-typical. Among the strengths associated with this way of perceiving are an ability to hyper-focus, give attention to detail, retain a good memory, and be creative. However, there are also differences from the neuro-typical way of engaging with biblical text which can make it difficult or confusing. For example, when reading a poem, the neuro-diverse person tends to focus on the details but battles to put them into perspective within the ‘big picture’. Also, metaphors which are devised by others may be troublesome. Thus this study seeks to provide a multi-modal and multi-path way of reading a psalm and coming to understand it. <br> <br> This approach was tried out with Psalm 121 and Psalm 93. Some adults who identify themselves as neuro-diverse were invited to respond. One, a personal friend and a former SIL member, gave a significant amount of enlightening feedback. Some responses from others provide a larger backdrop for understanding the generality or specificity of her thoughts. The results are limited, but begin to open understanding to issues of which most of us are ignorant or insensitive. Thus the paper serves to awaken the neuro-typical among us to realise that a traditional, ‘one-size-fits-all’ approach is excluding a fair number of persons who would wish to study the Bible. <br> <br> The hope is also, through this presentation, to garner other interested persons who might be willing to participate in further research in this direction, giving their feedback to the approaches suggested. <br> </p>

