---
title: "Insights From MAT Workshops Into Motivations for Bible Translation – Instruments or Symbols?" 
meta_title: "" 
description: "" 
date: 2025-10-28T14:35:00Z 
categories: ["2025"] 
author: "Maik Gibson & Ken Dekker" 
tags: ["Church and Community"] 
draft: false
---

{{< youtube pN4ZqNAst7g >}}

<p>The Multilingualism Assessment Tool for Bible Translation (MAT) is a tool for deeper engagement with members of communities regarding their translation goals. In ten training workshops for facilitators - in Africa, Asia and the Americas - members of communities were also invited so that the trainees could practice the tool with them. This paper presents something of what we have heard from these community members as they discussed their hopes of the impact of a Bible translation in their language.  <br>  <br> MAT itself is very focused on the use and translation of Scripture, however the main theme that emerged from community members was a focus on the revitalization of their language through Bible translation, rather than the provision of greater access to Scripture. We characterise this hope as fitting within a framework of a Bible translation functioning primarily as a symbol (of the status of the language and of identity) rather than as an instrument (for a deeper understanding of the Scriptures) – it is of course possible for a Bible translation to function as both.  <br>  <br> We explore the implications of Bible translations functioning as instruments and/or symbols, examining where these different motivations are mutually compatible, and where they may lead to different paths of action, such as in cases where a community is shifting its primary language. In these cases an emphasis on language preservation, where the language is primarily viewed as a symbol, will lead to one set of activities, while an emphasis on Scripture Engagement, where languages are primarily instruments, may lead to another. Finally we consider how to have ethical and constructive conversations about these issues with the communities with whom we partner.  <br> </p>

