---
title: "Duwo as a Functor in Kanuri and its Roles in Translation" 
meta_title: "" 
description: "" 
date: 2025-10-31T11:45:00Z 
categories: ["2025"] 
author: "Plangtong Joshua" 
tags: ["Communication and Context","Theology, Hermeneutics, and Exegesis"] 
draft: false
---

{{< youtube FcLto6x2mpk >}}

<h1>Abstract</h1>
<p>This presentation is about a particle <em>duwo</em> that has several roles in a text. Scholars like Lukas (cited by Hutchison, 1981), Cyffer (1998), and Hutchison (1981) wrote about <em>duwo</em>. However, their analysis proves that <em>duwo</em>is hard to analyze. While Cyffer and Lukas approached this from a grammatical point of view, Hutchison blended grammar and discourse. The motivation for this research stems from the frequent appearances of <em>duwo </em>in speech, text, translation, and from speakers’ words; it does not have a meaning but is necessary for naturalness. This raises interesting questionsː: If <em>duwo </em>is meaningless, why is it frequently found in texts and speech? What functions is it performing? How could the meaning of this word influence our translation/ethics? Etc. The approach used in this research is field methods, where texts were collected and analyzed to see the different instances where <em>duwo </em>is used and the function it serves in such cases. These findings were then applied in translation with the translation team. This investigation centers on grammar, discourse, and translation concerns. It reveals that <em>duwo </em>performs some grammatical/discourse functions in texts. It is used more frequently in texts than in translation, but we could apply it more in our translation by understanding its usages in texts.</p>

