---
title: "Why Bible Translation Organizations Need Digital Literacy Training with Biblical Ethics" 
meta_title: "" 
description: "" 
date: 2025-10-28T16:25:00Z 
categories: ["2025"] 
author: "Sheryl Silzer" 
tags: ["Technology and Resources","Remote Presenter"] 
draft: false
---

{{< youtube LjxTRSlVXiY >}}

<p>The growth of artificial intelligence (AI) is rapidly reshaping the world into a digital economy where more services are now offered online. AI is making everything work faster and more efficiently including the work of Bible translation. AI has opened a new world. However, due to its usefulness and economic benefits particularly in marketing, AI being man-made and subject to human sin nature contributes to ethical concerns and are largely ignored. On the other hand, the need for digital literacy training to address AI ethical concerns has grown. Although numerous studies categorized ethical concerns, there is no agreement on how to effectively address these concerns such as privacy, human errors or bias, and human judgment. Considering the impact of AI ethical concerns, governments, businesses, and educational institutions are developing and offering digital literacy training as most people are unaware of what AI is and how it can impact their lives and work. Digital literacy training teaches people how to properly use and evaluate AI resources. As present-day Bible translation relies heavily on AI programs, it is recommended that digital literacy training with biblical ethics be offered organization wide to enable the Bible translation workforce to understand AI and use it to ensure an accurate, clear, natural, as well as accessible translation of the Bible and the Gospel message.</p>

