---
title: "Communicating or Confusing: The Ethical Implications of Archaic and Unclear Translations" 
meta_title: "" 
description: "" 
date: 2025-10-30T10:15:00Z 
categories: ["2025"] 
author: "Rev. G. B. Amar" 
tags: ["Church and Community","Communication and Context","Theology, Hermeneutics, and Exegesis"] 
draft: false
---

{{< youtube qTQSonEosoo >}}

<p>Presenting the author’s intended meaning clearly and accurately is a critical ethical challenge in Bible translation. Literal translations often preserve archaic language and outdated expressions, causing confusion among readers. This issue is evident in major Indian language Bibles, where even pastors and theologians struggle to interpret certain passages correctly. <br>  <br> This paper addresses such ethical challenges in the Odia Bible (OV-BSI) and their impact on reader comprehension. A key example is 1 Corinthians 7:36–38, which is widely misinterpreted as referring to a marriage relationship between a father and daughter. Some have even questioned, “How can we follow a Bible that encourages incest?” However, analysis of the original Greek text and comparisons with other versions confirm that Paul is speaking about a man and his fiancée. This misunderstanding highlights the need for greater clarity to prevent theological confusion and misapplication. <br>  <br> Through research and comparative studies, this paper identifies how archaic language and poor contextual translation and interpretation distort core teachings of Scripture and hinder spiritual growth. An ethical translation requires preserving theological integrity while ensuring the message is accessible and relevant to the reader’s context. Translators have an ethical responsibility to provide a faithful yet clear translation that reflects both the original author’s intent and the cultural understanding of the audience. <br>  <br> To address these issues, the NOBO (New Outreach Bible in Odia) project has adopted a meaning-based translation approach, focusing on Clarity and Accuracy while ensuring cultural and theological Acceptability. This paper evaluates how NOBO's strategy can resolve these issues and enhance Scripture engagement among Odia speakers. <br>  <br> This study also explores the broader implications of miscommunication in Bible translation, emphasizing that faithfulness to the original text must be balanced with comprehensibility for the target audience. Insights from this research aim to strengthen translation practices and minimize miscommunication in future Bible projects. <br> </p>

