---
title: "Benefits and Ethical Considerations Involved Using Complementary Theoretical Frameworks in Bible Translation" 
meta_title: "" 
description: "" 
date: 2025-10-29T15:40:00Z 
categories: ["2025"] 
author: "Onesmus Kamwara & Helga Schroeder" 
tags: ["Communication and Context"] 
draft: false
---



<p>In this paper we endeavour to discuss the ethical considerations that translation teams need to take into account while using multiple theoretical frameworks to guide translation work. To begin with, we argue for the benefit of applying theoretical frameworks to guide translation and the benefits of combining more than one complementary theory. Finally we discuss the ethical consideration to take into account while doing this. We will be using translation of figures of speech into Kitharaka for our examples. <br> <br> Using theoretical frameworks in translation can help the translation teams to maintain faithfulness to the source text and theological integrity. Adherence to the theoretical guides can also ensure cultural relevance and clarity of the translation. Linguistic theories will provide a basis for how meaning is conveyed across languages. On the other hand Cultural, and anthropological frameworks will help translators to navigate across cultural differences. <br> <br> We would like to use the metaphor of a theoretical framework being a lens to look at phenomena. A lens allows you to focus on specific details while filtering out others. In the same way a theoretical framework will lay emphasis on certain aspects of translation. A lens has boundaries. It also allows certain light through it. Similarly, each theoretical framework has its limitations, providing more insights into some facets while leaving other aspects unexplored. Combining theoretical frameworks can allow a wider and deeper comprehension into a subject of study by integrating different perspectives. <br> <br> To effectively use multiple theoretical frameworks there are a number of ethical considerations that the translation team need to take into account. What part of each theoretical framework do you take and what do you not apply? How do you harmonize the various theories? Attempts to answer these questions forms part of our translation.</p>

