---
title: "Holistic Bible Translation Approach for Sustainable Community Transformation" 
meta_title: "" 
description: "" 
date: 2025-10-28T11:00:00Z 
categories: ["2025"] 
author: "Reuben Muraguri & Irene Chemaiyek" 
tags: ["Church and Community","Technology and Resources"] 
draft: false
---

{{< youtube CNgchY2-VBU >}}

<p>A James 2:14-17 Model.  <br>  <br> Bible translation is not merely a linguistic task; it is an act of ministry that demands a comprehensive vision of transformation. Grounded in James 2:15-16... “Suppose a brother, or a sister is without clothes and daily food. If one of you says to them, “Go in peace; keep warm and well fed,” but does nothing about their physical needs, what good is it?”.  <br>  <br> This calls on believers to care for the most vulnerable while exercising their faith—this approach to Bible translation transcends the simple conversion of the message and instead seeks to engage every facet of human need. Traditional translation efforts often focus exclusively on Biblical accuracy, neglecting the potential for Scripture to catalyse profound spiritual renewal, emotional healing, psychological restoration, and physical well-being. Consequently, projects that treat Bible translation as a stand-alone exercise risk missing the opportunity to unlock the full transformative power of God’s Word.   <br>  <br> To address this gap, our study adopts an integrated, multi-dimensional approach modelled after the practices of Oasis Community Network (OCN). This research evaluates Bible translation projects not only by the quality of translation but also by their capacity to foster deep spiritual engagement, facilitate Bible-based trauma healing that addresses emotional / psychological wounds, and stimulate community development initiatives that meet tangible physical needs.    <br>  <br> Employing a qualitative case study methodology—with data collected through interviews, participant observations, and program assessments, we have observed that when translation efforts are embedded within a holistic framework, they yield multifaceted benefits like enhanced spiritual engagement, resilience, psychological well-being, and measurable progress in community development.   <br>  <br> In conclusion, this study underscores the ethical imperative that Bible translation must be approached as a holistic ministry that addresses the whole person, guided by the mandate of James 2:14-17.  <br> </p>

