---
title: "The Paraphrase: Where Ethics Meets Form, Theory, and Audience" 
meta_title: "" 
description: "" 
date: 2025-10-30T15:00:00Z 
categories: ["2025"] 
author: "Dr. Freddy Boswell" 
tags: ["Communication and Context"] 
draft: false
---

{{< youtube ZXGxPdHBNvM >}}

<p>The publication success of the Paraphrase is unquestioned. Sales of the Living Bible, for example, which had the word “Paraphrase” embossed on its cover, have exceeded 42 million copies. New readers of the Bible, introduced to Scripture through this groundbreaking paraphrase, extolled their avenues of exciting insights and engagement. More recently The Message has had a parallel impact. <br>  <br> Even so, what is in question regarding the Paraphrase is its authenticity and integrity. Can translation scholars, priests, and ordinary readers ethically consider it to be “the Word of the Lord”? If they should do so, how do they respond when critics say they are in error—perhaps even mortal error?  <br>  <br> This paper considers the form and function of the Paraphrase, contrasted with what many would consider to be traditional, and acceptable translations of Scripture. Where are the  boundaries, guidelines, and pitfalls of the Paraphrase? When a reader engages with its message, is there a “bridge too far” that disconnects the reader from the “Word of God”, and thus the conclusion is that it is unethical to consider it to be holy writ?  <br>  <br> While perhaps raising more questions than answers on a topic with a wide range of opinions, and written and unwritten norms of acceptability, the author brings the success, impact, and wide distribution of this particular “translation genre” to the consideration and debate of the academic translation community. Important for the debate are the authorial intentions of the translators, and these are presented and explained from research by the presenter. <br> </p>

