---
title: "A Framework for Understanding and Implementing AI Ethically in Bible Translation" 
meta_title: "" 
description: "" 
date: 2025-10-29T16:25:00Z 
categories: ["2025"] 
author: "Joe Burgin" 
tags: ["Methodologies, Media, and Multimodality","Technology and Resources","Remote Presenter"] 
draft: false
---

{{< youtube nsxtGuUyF28 >}}

<p>A framework for the ethical role of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in Bible Translation is presented here as an application of a thesis for the general understanding and ethical use of AI, proposed recently by Andy Crouch at the Praxis Redemptive AI Forum. <br>   <br> Building on A Redemptive Thesis for Artificial Intelligence - A call to repair and redeem through AI, six grounding assumptions provide context for the ethical understanding of AI in Bible translation: <br>    <br> 1. The enduring image <br> 2. A pattern of deceptions <br> 3. Very good and also very distorted <br> 4. As consequential as the Internet — or electricity — or agriculture <br> 5. Asymmetrical risk—even without a singularity <br> 6. The fantasy of the superhuman <br>   <br> and six redemptive directions provide guidance for the ethical use of AI in Bible translation: <br>    <br> 1. Redemptive AI will inform but not replace human agency. <br> 2. Redemptive AI will develop rather than diminish human cognitive capacity and extend rather than replace education. <br> 3. Redemptive AI will respect and advance human embodiment. <br> 4. Redemptive AI will serve personal relationships rather than replace them. <br> 5. Redemptive AI will restore trust in human institutions by protecting privacy and advancing transparency. <br> 6. Redemptive AI will benefit the global majority rather than enrich and entrench a narrow minority. <br>    <br> A range of use cases exploring the implementation of ethical AI in Bible translation will be assessed by the application of a "Redemptive Thesis for Artificial Intelligence" framework as a rubric. <br>    <br>   <br> Crouch, Andy. A Redemptive Thesis for Artificial Intelligence - A call to repair and redeem through AI. <a href="https://journal.praxis.co/a-redemptive-thesis-for-artificial-intelligence-ff7dafdd01b5">https://journal.praxis.co/a-redemptive-thesis-for-artificial-intelligence-ff7dafdd01b5</a>. <br> Accessed 11 March 2025. <br>  <br> </p>

